---
title: Lazy Doc, Your documentation tool has arrived.
date: 2025-03-04
summary: An AI enpowered documentation tool.
categories: elixir
header:
  overlay_color: "#000"
  overlay_filter: "0.5"
  overlay_image: /images/2022-08-06-factory.png
---

## Idea

All started with a conversation with my boss, I was talking to him about a game we play (Balatro, wonderful game), and suddenly he asked, What do you use AI models ?
I told him that currently the state of the AI is not that good to suggest code, but it was good to suggest other things like explanations, suggest syntax fixes, etc...
One of the problems we have in my company codebase is that we have so much undocumented code, which is not a big problem at all because we have a really clear API of how to interact but everytime someone new comes to the project you need to explain the localize knowledge. Also we talked that AI writing docs might be good, but we didnt even know because we had not tested yet. Thats how Lazy Doc idea came from.

## What is Lazy Doc ?

Lazy Doc is a tool to improve your unexistent or missing Elixir docs via AI. It detects undocumented functions give the source code to the AI and it generates documentation based on it.

You just need to install it and configure it, execute `mix lazy_doc` and boom you have brand new documentation from scratch.

### Purpose

The purpose of `Lazy Doc` is much bigger it aims to be a docs checker as well.

with `mix lazy_doc.check` you can check if all the documentation under `patterns` documentation is documented. This check can be easily implemented in the CI, so if you forget to document something CI wont pass.

### Documentation criteria

Lazy Doc will only document functions that are agree with the following criteria:

- Public functions not already documented. (already documented functions are ignored) 
- Public functions without hidden documentation tag `@doc false`. (hidden docs function are ignored).
- Private functions are ignored (*but included in the prompt if they are auxiliar continue reading for more info*).

so this way if `lazy_doc.check` does not pass because a function, so you take action.

- Make the function private
- Make the doc hidden
- Document or just execute `mix lazy_doc`.

The main thing LazyDoc is so good is because it enforces you to write documentation and if you dont want (because it is a massive amount of work) to you will have a good start template.


## How is it built ?

Okay, you want to built a an automatic documentor right ? So the first step is to detect what the hell you should document and what you should not and **leave it as it is**.

So what alternatives do you have to detect undocumented functions.

You always read the file at least once and then you have multiple approaches.

- Read line by line the file in order to check if the line above a function is a `@doc whatever`

okay, problems with this approach

  - how do you get the code of a single function and its clauses ? you can try to read lines until one end , but how you know if it is an `end` of a `case` or an `end` of the `def`.
  - how do you retain the format of the file ?
  - how do you detect inner inner modules ?
  - how do you detect if a function is inside an inner module or not ?

As you can see this is a simple approach but it has a bunch of problems and probably many more that I dont even thought because I dont even try to implement it this way.

So what is our alternative ?

### ASTs for the king approach

Okay, so we are gonna try to detect functions through the AST of the module but first, lets explain what an AST is. An AST is a data structure which contains the syntax of the code, in fact it stands for *Abstract Syntax Tree*.

In Elixir an AST has always the same pattern.

``` elixir
{:defmodule = name, [...] = meta, [...] = children } = node
```

So you get the AST of file, via `Code.string_to_quote()` function.

so for example for this module.

``` elixir
defmodule Example do
  @doc "converts to string"
  def number(n) do
    Kernel.to_string(n)
  end
end
```

*Note: you can experiment with [ast.ninja site](ast.ninja) if you want to experiment with ASTs*

This is the given AST

``` elixir

{:defmodule, [line: 1],
 [
   {:__aliases__, [line: 1], [:Example]},
   [
     do: {:__block__, [],
      [
        {:@, [line: 2],
         [
           {:doc, [line: 2],
            ["converts to string"]}
         ]},
        {:def, [line: 3],
         [
           {:number, [line: 3],
            [{:n, [line: 3], nil}]},
           [
             do: {{:., [line: 4],
               [
                 {:__aliases__,
                  [line: 4], [:Kernel]},
                 :to_string
               ]}, [line: 4],
              [{:n, [line: 4], nil}]}
           ]
         ]}
      ]}
   ]
 ]}```

You can just pattern match the node you want and get the code from that node. for example:

``` elixir
{:def = name, [...] = meta, [...] = children } = ast_fun
```

In `ast_fun` we have the sub ast of that function we just need to convert it back to code and send it to analyze to AI, but just if it is not documented.

And you know that `number` function is in the `Example` module beacuse it was in their children nodes list.

#### How do you convert AST to String again ?

You can just use `Macro.to_string(ast_fun)`. (There is some caviar on this continue reading).

#### How we know if a function is already documented or not ?

Easy, you just need to call `Code.fetch_docs` which requires to give the name of the module.

Not so fast, what happens if you have the same name of function with different number of arguments (different arities not clauses).
This function will return you documentation for each different function in the language, but are 2 functions named the same different from each other just because their airty differs.
The answer is **YES**, but does this make sense in the POV of documentation.
Think about a moment of what coding situation would you use the same name with different arities.


Lets take a look this example:

``` elixir

## Look this function, does make sense if you hide the other functions ?
def fibs(n) do
  fibs(n, [1, 0])
end

def fibs(1, [a, b | rest]), do: [a + b, a, b | rest]

def fibs(n, [a, b | rest]) do
  fibs(n - 1, [a + b, a, b | rest])
end
```

Probably just because one of the functions is auxiliar of the other. So the auxiliar function does not it make sense by itself and the entry point function does not make sense without the auxiliar. We need a way to group up functions name the same with different arity and clauses (function same name and same arity) to send it to AI in a single prompt.

### Fetch the prompt

Okay, you need a way to get the documentation from the AI

So what you should do is to call an AI API, but which one ?

There is a bunch of AI APIs and everyone has its favorite AI. So why not give freedom to call your own AI ?

You just need to implement the `LazyDoc.Provider` behavior. This is the contract that will use `LazyDoc` to request the docs to API and extract them from the response.

### Make a good prompt (AI is like a kid explain what you want).

Making a good prompt is really important for fetching the docs, you should specify your prompt always with at least one example and be precise with the format you want.

Example:

``` elixir
~s(You should describe the parameters based on the spec given and give a small description of the following function.\n\nPlease do it in the following format given as an example, important do not return the header of the function, do not return a explanation of the function, your output must be only the docs in the following format:\n\nReturns the Transaction corresponding to transaction_id\(Initial sentence indicating what returns the function\)\n\n## Parameters\n\n- transaction_id - foreign key of the Transactions table.\n## Description\n Performs a search in the database\n\nFunction to document:\n)
```

This is the default prompt the library will use, to this prompt you should concatenate the function code.

### Insert the docs on the AST

To insert the doc in the AST you just need to create a `@doc` node and insert it just before `def` node.

but what if this `def` node is in an inner module children. You need to find first the children of the corresponding module. *JUST pattern match*, it will work (complex pattern match but i promise, it will work). Once you have the children, need to locate the `def` node position in the children and then insert it just one position before.


### The end of the trip ?

And then transform the AST to String with `Macro.to_string()` and write it to a file right ?

**WRONG**, you just messed up all the format of the original file.

what? where are my comments? it just deleted my comments the entire process.

how you fix it ?

### The master talk about AST manipulation.

At this point you are almost there, almost done but you are kind of screwed because you want to preserve the code as it was. Remember this ?
> **leave the code as it is**

It is one of the premises that we have at least to use it in production.

Surprise surprise, you have seen it before, it is the `AST NINJA` talk. Actually the name of the talk is `The Elixir parser under microscope` by `Arjan Scherpenisse`.

This talk about how to preserve the code as it is after an AST manipulation. Basically what you need to do is to do what the Elixir Formatter does, Add tokenizer metadata to AST, store the comments outside the AST and merge it after all the AST manipulation.

Fortunately this talk was done years ago and the Elixir std library changed according this library recommended so we just need to use `Code.string_to_quote_with_comments` with some options and then after the AST manipulation use 

``` elixir
ast
|> quote_to_algebra(comments: comments, ...)
|> Inspect.Algebra.format(max_line_width_configured)
|> IO.iodata_to_binary()
```

This will preserve the format of the file.

## Feature requests

After telling you how you can build LazyDoc, I can tell you what features request were requested.

- They requested a way to not have bloated documentation files, the issue users found was that generating so much docs will cause the file incresize the size dramtically.
So in order to address it, I added the `external_doc` option which allows you to write the doc in a separate markdown file and read the doc of that function at compile time.

Example:

```md
Returns a list of documentation for each function in the specified modules.

## Parameters

- modules - a list of module names to extract documentation from.
  
## Description
 Retrieves the documentation for functions in the given modules using Elixir's introspection capabilities.
```

``` elixir
  @doc File.read!("priv/lazy_doc/lazy_doc/docs_per_module.md")
  def docs_per_module(modules) do
    ...
  end 
```

this way you can enjoy a rich documentation without having big blocks of documentation before each function.

- In the article, we focus on the functions because they were more interesting to analyze how they were done, but the library can also generate `@moduledoc` based on the code of the module, but usually a module needs a context in the application in order to write their `@moduledoc` so the feature request is to make a dependency module graph and include the dependency `@moduledoc` or the code of dependency module in the prompt. (TO BE DONE).

- Another interesting feature is to clean all the docs, so this way you can regenerate them from scratch, so we have created a third task `mix lazy_doc.clean` which deletes all the `@doc` annotations, but it keeps `@doc false` annotations.

- Make a default prompt to generate docs complaint with `ex_docs`, this way when we generate the docs webpage, you can experience the documentation as it was a usual docs.

## Conclusion

Making new projects make you learn a lot of stuff. Usually to share your projects, you need to write how to use them properly, thats the reason developers write docs. I dont personally know a bunch of people who likes writing docs or they have time to write them. Writing docs maybe does not add to much business value to the product you are building but it will add a huge value to developers building the product and they are gonna be less propense to make mistakes.

Writing LazyDoc, it allows me to learn about deep depth of Elixir core and Elixir AST and learn what weird stuff you can do. For example

```elixir

defmodule Hello do

  defmodule Hello do

  end

end
```

This is valid Elixir code, but it is not allowed in LazyDoc.

Writing LazyDoc, I realize that good software sometimes needs to be opionated, take a strong opinion a follow it until the end, for example `external_doc` feature is really opinionated because some people will like to have the docs in the code and some other will just like to see the code and not being distracted but anything else. Another strong opinion that this library takes is what does with the functions of the same name, basically we understand that they are the same function to document even that for Elixir it is not. At least every teammate I asked told me that 2 functions named the same are always related, so make sense to document them together. Same nested named modules does not make sense it almost any situation, so LazyDoc does not allow it because they have the same AST structure.

Thank you very much for your reading effort.

You can support [lazy_doc repo](https://github.com/pxp9/lazy_doc) and if you are curious how LazyDoc docs look, LazyDoc is documented by LazyDoc itself you can check it in [lazy_doc hexdocs](https://hexdocs.pm/lazy_doc/api-reference.html)
